# AVTransport
This repository hosts the AVTransport container/media transmission protocol, and the reference implementation code.

Currently, the protocol is a draft, and its syntax is subject to change.

You can read the current rendered draft by opening the [autogenerated webpage](https://cyanreg.github.io/avtransport/).

## Features

 - **64 bit presentation and duration timestamps** (465.66129 picosecond accuracy)
 - **Actual timebase** (allows accurate representation of rational framerates)
 - Sub-frame latency
 - Large FEC range, using RaptorQ
 - Only container to include mandatory error correction data on the headers themselves
 - Extra resilient headers (each FEC segment carries a piece of the main header)
 - Flexible keyframe indexing (indexes for seeking carry additional information)
 - Lossless cutting of compressed video (any frame dependencies can be made invisible)
 - Stream packet data compression
 - Uncompressed video and audio encapsulation
 - For H264 and HEVC, a real 64-bit dts timestamp.
 - ICC profile support
 - Color lookup table support (Adobe .cube)
 - Raw DNG support
 - Timestamp clock, allowing for jitter compensation
 - Unified, cycle-accurate clock for exact synchronization between multiple streams.

### File extension
The `.avt` file extensions should be used.

## Tools

The project provides tools to enable the creation, conversion, and provide information
about AVTransport streams.

### avcat

**avcat** is a swiss army knife program for creating and manipulating AVTransport streams,
and streams of different formats if FFmpeg support was enabled.

Information on its usage is provided in the README of the tool.

avcat is automatically built when [libavtransport](#libavtransport) is enabled.

## libavtransport

The project provides a reference implementation, **libavtransport** with full support for the standard.

As well as being clean, segmented and commented, the code is a fully usable and optimized library,
rather than only being a reference. The library is meant for embedding into different projects.

Information on the internals of the library can be found in its directory.

### Building

To build the library, run the standard meson build process:

```
meson build
ninja -C build
```

This will create a shared library by default, and will compile all [tools](#tools).

The only hard requirement for building the library is [libcbor](#https://github.com/PJK/libcbor),
which is universally packaged. If packaging is not an option, simply create a `subprojects`
directory and clone [libcbor](#https://github.com/PJK/libcbor) into it. It will then be compiled
alongside libavtransport.

## Links
You can talk about the project and get in touch with developers on:
 - IRC: **`#avtransport`** on the [Libera.Chat](ircs://irc.libera.chat:6697) network
  - [Libera.Chat’s guide on how to connect](https://libera.chat/guides/connect)
    - Or use the [Kiwi web client](https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.libera.chat/?#avtransport)

## License
The [specifications document)(draft-avtransport-spec.bs), and generated [HTML](https://cyanreg.github.io/avtransport/) are licensed under the **MIT-Zero** license.

The reference software (`libavtransport`) is licensed under the [**BSD 2-clause license**](LICENSE.md), in order to permit embedding, and free creation of alternative implementations.

## Feature comparison between protocols and containers

 - Streamable - whether a protocol can be reliably streamed
   * AVTransport: Yes. As both a protocol and a container, it can be direcly streamed over networks, pipes, packets, or serial links.
   * WebRTC: yes
   * RTMP: yes
   * MPEG-TS: yes
   * RIST: yes
   * SRT: yes
   * ISOBMFF/MP4: with large hacks. Requires chunking.
   * Matroska: no. With hacks, it could be chunked like ISOBMFF.
   * NUT: no
 - Latency
   * AVTransport: Minimal.
   * WebRTC: Medium. Without FEC, it's a single frame. With FEC, it's high.
   * RTMP: Low.
   * MPEG-TS: Minimal.
   * RIST: Generally high, due to FEC.
   * SRT: Generally high, due to FEC.
   * ISOBMFF/MP4: Huge. Even with the newest low latency extensions.
   * Matroska: Massive.
   * NUT: Medium.
 - Stream overhead - ratio between useful data and actually transmitted data
   * AVTransport: Low. Each packet has a 36 byte header.
   * WebRTC: Low to medium. Each packet has typically between 24 bytes and 76 bytes of headers.
   * RTMP: Low to medium. Each packet has typically 32 bytes of headers.
   * MPEG-TS: Very high. Each media packet is highly segmented due to 188-byte packet limit of MPEG-TS.
   * RIST: Very high, as it encapsulates MPEG-TS.
   * SRT: Very high, as it encapsulates MPEG-TS.
   * Matroska: Very low. It was designed to take the least amount of space possible.
   * Nut: Low. It was designed to not waste space.
 - Error resilience - resilience to receiving incorrect data, bitflips, and desyncs, without using FEC
   * AVTransport: Extremely high. Bitflips in headers are corrected (up to 40% of all bits may be flipped before errors appear). Resynchronization is extremely fast. Senders can send parity data for packets. Receivers can request retransmission of packets.
   * WebRTC: Low. Receivers may request retransmission of packets (which impacts latency).
   * RTMP: Very low.
   * MPEG-TS: Medium. Due to having very high overhead, there is a lot of redundant data. No native support for packet retransmissions.
   * RIST: Low, as it thinly encapsulates MPEG-TS. Relies on packet retransmissions.
   * SRT: Low, as it thinly encapsulates MPEG-TS. Relies on packet retransmissions.
   * Matroska: Very low.
   * ISOBMFF/MP4: Extremely low.
   * NUT: Low.
 - Error correction - forward error correction to reduce impact of packet drops, at the cost of latency
   * AVTransport: Very high. It has a large amount of redundancy, that increases as the bitrate increases. FEC is done via RaptorQ, the most efficient algorithm.
   * WebRTC: Medium, if enabled. The FEC algorithm it uses is simplistic. It requires bidirectional communication to adapt, during which corruption may appear.
   * RTMP: Non-existent.
   * MPEG-TS: Medium to high, due to its high overhead.
   * RIST: Medium to high.
   * SRT: Medium to high.
   * Matroska: Non-existent.
   * ISOBMFF/MP4: Non-existent.
   * NUT: Non-existent.
 - Clock recovery - whether drift compensation is possible, to ensure frames are not dropped at presentation. [Explanation](https://www.obe.tv/why-does-mpeg-ts-still-exist/), Clock Recovery section.
   * AVTransport: High.
   * WebRTC: None.
   * RTMP: None.
   * MPEG-TS: High.
   * RIST: High.
   * SRT: High.
   * Matroska: None.
   * ISOBMFF/MP4: None.
   * NUT: None.
 - Common clock between streams - whether each stream's clock can be synchronized, to ensure there is no drift between streams. [Explanation](https://www.obe.tv/why-does-mpeg-ts-still-exist/), Common Clock for Audio and Video section.
   * AVTransport: Yes.
   * WebRTC: No.
   * RTMP: Yes.
   * MPEG-TS: Yes.
   * RIST: Yes.
   * SRT: Yes.
   * Matroska: Yes.
   * ISOBMFF/MP4: Yes.
   * NUT: Yes.
 - Timestamp precision
   * AVTransport: 465.66129 picoseconds
   * WebRTC: 11 microseconds
   * RTMP: 1 millisecond
   * MPEG-TS: 11 microseconds
   * RIST: 11 microseconds
   * SRT: 11 microseconds
   * Matroska: 1 millisecond
   * ISOBMFF/MP4: Variable.
   * NUT: 1 nanosecond
 - Multicast - whether streams can be transmitted over Multicast
   * AVTransport: Yes.
   * WebRTC: No.
   * RTMP: No.
   * MPEG-TS: Yes.
   * RIST: No.
   * SRT: No.
   * ISOBMFF/MP4: No.
   * Matroska: No.
   * NUT: No.
 - File resilience to being truncated, missing chunks, seeking, and giving decoders invalid data
   * AVTransport: Extremely high. Impossible to mistake the start of a packet. Decoders will never be given wrong data.
   * WebRTC: Cannot be saved.
   * RTMP: Cannot be saved.
   * MPEG-TS: Extremely low to high, depending on the demuxer. Generally, extremely low.
   * RIST: Cannot be saved.
   * SRT: Cannot be saved.
   * ISOBMFF/MP4: Extremely low to impossibly low. If the MOV atom is missing, the entire file is mostly unsalvageable.
   * Matroska: Medium.
   * NUT: High.
 - Standard
   * AVTransport: Minimal. New codecs and packets can be added quickly by anyone. User data and custom codecs are supported.
   * WebRTC: Extremely rigid. Extended through the IETF, which requires many years of work to accept extensions.
   * RTMP: Extremely rigid. It took more than 10 years to support anything except H.264.
   * MPEG-TS: Somewhat rigid. Requests for new codec registrations may take a while. Unextendable, and somewhat incompatible, as all new codecs must fit in previously user-data.
   * RIST: No specifications. Closed source.
   * SRT: Public specifications. Must join an organization.
   * ISOBMFF/MP4: Low rigidity. Actively extended, though some features may take time to be stabilized.
   * Matroska: Low rigidity. It takes a while to add new features.
   * NUT: Low rigidity.
